---
title: Manage Releases
eleventyNavigation:
    key: manage releases
    parent: maintain eslint
    title: Manage Releases
    order: 4
---

Releases are when a project formally publishes a new version so the community can use it. There are two types of releases:

- Regular releases that follow [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) and are considered production-ready.
- Prereleases that are not considered production-ready and are intended to give the community a preview of upcoming changes.

## Release Manager

One member of the Technical Steering Committee (TSC) is assigned to manage each scheduled release. The release manager is determined at the TSC meeting the day before the release.

The release manager is responsible for:

1. The scheduled release on Friday.
1. Monitoring issues over the weekend.
1. Determining if a patch release is necessary on Monday.
1. Publishing the patch release (if necessary).

The release manager should seek input from the whole team on the Monday following a release to double-check if a patch release is necessary.

The release manager needs to have access to ESLint's two-factor authentication for npm in order to do a release.

## Release Communication

Each scheduled release is associated with an autogenerated release issue ([example](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18151)). The release issue is the source of information for the team about the status of a release and contains a checklist that the release manager should follow.

## Process

On the day of a scheduled release, the release manager should follow the steps in the release issue.

All release-related communications occur in a thread in the `#team` channel on Discord.

On the Monday following the scheduled release, the release manager needs to determine if a patch release is necessary. A patch release is considered necessary if any of the following occurred since the scheduled release:

- A regression bug is causing people's lint builds to fail when it previously passed.
- Any bug that is causing a lot of problems for users (frequently happens due to new functionality).

The patch release decision should be made as early on Monday as possible. If a patch release is necessary, then follow the same steps as the scheduled release process.

In rare cases, a second patch release might be necessary if the release is known to have a severe regression that hasn't been fixed by Monday. If this occurs, the release manager should announce the situation on the release issue, and leave the issue open until all patch releases are complete. However, it's usually better to fix bugs for the next release cycle rather than doing a second patch release.

After the patch release has been published (or no patch release is necessary), close the release issue and inform the team that they can start merging in semver-minor changes again.

### Release Parameters

The following tables show examples of the option to select as `RELEASE_TYPE` when starting `eslint-js Release` (the `@eslint/js` package release) and `eslint Release` (the `eslint` package release) jobs on Jenkins to release a new version with the latest features. In both jobs, `main` should be selected as `RELEASE_BRANCH`.

| **HEAD Version** | **Desired Next Version** | **`eslint-js Release`<br>`RELEASE_TYPE`** |
| :--------------: | :----------------------: | :---------------------------------------: |
|     `9.25.0`     |         `9.25.1`         |                  `patch`                  |
|     `9.25.0`     |         `9.26.0`         |                  `minor`                  |
|     `9.25.0`     |     `10.0.0-alpha.0`     |                 `alpha.0`                 |
| `10.0.0-alpha.0` |     `10.0.0-alpha.1`     |                  `alpha`                  |
| `10.0.0-alpha.1` |     `10.0.0-beta.0`      |                  `beta`                   |
| `10.0.0-beta.0`  |     `10.0.0-beta.1`      |                  `beta`                   |
| `10.0.0-beta.1`  |      `10.0.0-rc.0`       |                   `rc`                    |
|  `10.0.0-rc.0`   |      `10.0.0-rc.1`       |                   `rc`                    |
|  `10.0.0-rc.1`   |         `10.0.0`         |                  `major`                  |

| **HEAD Version** | **Desired Next Version** | **`eslint Release`<br>`RELEASE_TYPE`** |
| :--------------: | :----------------------: | :------------------------------------: |
|     `9.25.0`     |   `9.25.1` or `9.26.0`   |                `latest`                |
|     `9.25.0`     |     `10.0.0-alpha.0`     |                `alpha`                 |
| `10.0.0-alpha.0` |     `10.0.0-alpha.1`     |                `alpha`                 |
| `10.0.0-alpha.1` |     `10.0.0-beta.0`      |                 `beta`                 |
| `10.0.0-beta.0`  |     `10.0.0-beta.1`      |                 `beta`                 |
| `10.0.0-beta.1`  |      `10.0.0-rc.0`       |                  `rc`                  |
|  `10.0.0-rc.0`   |      `10.0.0-rc.1`       |                  `rc`                  |
|  `10.0.0-rc.1`   |         `10.0.0`         |                `latest`                |

When releasing a new version of the previous major line, the option to select as `RELEASE_TYPE` depends on whether the HEAD version is a prerelease or not. In both jobs, the corresponding development branch (for example, `v9.x-dev`) should be selected as `RELEASE_BRANCH`.

| **HEAD Version** | **Previous Major Line Version** | **Desired Next Version** | **`eslint-js Release`<br>`RELEASE_TYPE`** |
| :--------------: | :-----------------------------: | :----------------------: | :---------------------------------------: |
| `10.0.0-alpha.0` |            `9.25.0`             |         `9.25.1`         |                  `patch`                  |
| `10.0.0-alpha.0` |            `9.25.0`             |         `9.26.0`         |                  `minor`                  |
|     `10.0.0`     |            `9.25.0`             |         `9.25.1`         |            `maintenance.patch`            |
|     `10.0.0`     |            `9.25.0`             |         `9.26.0`         |            `maintenance.minor`            |

| **HEAD Version** | **Previous Major Line Version** | **Desired Next Version** | **`eslint Release`<br>`RELEASE_TYPE`** |
| :--------------: | :-----------------------------: | :----------------------: | :------------------------------------: |
| `10.0.0-alpha.0` |            `9.25.0`             |   `9.25.1` or `9.26.0`   |                `latest`                |
|     `10.0.0`     |            `9.25.0`             |   `9.25.1` or `9.26.0`   |             `maintenance`              |

## Emergency Releases

An emergency release is unplanned and isn't the regularly scheduled release or the anticipated patch release.

In general, we try not to do emergency releases. Even if there is a regression, it's best to wait until Monday to see if any other problems arise so a patch release can fix as many issues as possible.

The only real exception is if ESLint is completely unusable by most of the current users. For instance, we once pushed a release that errored for everyone because it was missing some core files. In that case, an emergency release is appropriate.

## Major Releases

This section describes additional tasks that should be done in eslint repositories and/or release infrastructure during a major release cycle. A major release cycle includes prereleases and the final release of a new major version of ESLint.

For simplicity, let v9.x be the current version, and v10.0.0 the new major version.

The following branches in the `eslint/eslint` repository are of importance for this release cycle:

- `main`: All the latest development always happens on this branch, and that also applies to major release cycles. This means that breaking changes should be merged into this branch, along with new features, bug fixes and everything else we usually merge into this branch. Prerelease versions and the final major version will be published from this branch.
- `next`: Branch for the latest prerelease documentation (`https://eslint.org/docs/next/`). This branch is automatically updated during the release process.
- `v9.x-dev`: Branch for v9.x maintenance. This branch starts from the last v9.x release commit before the first v10 prerelease. All new v9.x versions (if needed) will be published from this branch.
- `v9.x`: Branch for the ESLint v9.x documentation (`https://eslint.org/docs/v9.x/`). This branch is automatically updated during the release process. Note that this branch is needed only after the final v10.0.0 release. Until then, v9.x is still the latest version, and the documentation branch for it is `latest` (`https://eslint.org/docs/latest/`).

### First Prerelease

Work on the first prerelease (`alpha.0`) starts when the last planned v9.x release is concluded:

- On Netlify, open the `docs-eslint` project, and under `Project Configuration > Build & Deploy > Continuous deployment` find `Dependency management`. Check if the configured version of Node.js satisfies requirements of the new major version of ESLint. If not, update it to a new version of Node.js.
- On Jenkins, check if the installed version of Node.js satisfies requirements of the new major version of ESLint. If not, install a new version of Node.js.
- In the `eslint/eslint.org` repository, submit a PR to set `upcomingVersionPrereleaseType = "alpha"` in `tools/release-data.js`. This is to announce the prerelease in the version list on the `https://eslint.org/` homepage. The PR can be merged as soon as it is approved.
- In the `eslint/eslint.org` repository, submit a PR to enable `/docs/next/*` proxying in `src/static/redirects.njk`. The PR should be reviewed and approved in time, but merged right after ESLint 10.0.0-alpha.0 is released.
- In the `eslint/eslint.org` repository, submit a PR to update the Current Release Lines table in `src/content/pages/version-support.md`: add v10.x with Status "Current" and First Release as the planned first prerelease date (also add `<br>(prerelease)` after the date); update v9.x status to "Maintenance". The PR should be reviewed and approved in time, but merged right after ESLint 10.0.0-alpha.0 is released.
- In the `eslint/eslint` repository, submit a PR to add `legacy-peer-deps = true` in the `.npmrc` file. This is to ensure that `npm install` works in CI and locally for developers after the prerelease, because some dependencies (e.g., `@eslint-community/eslint-utils`) have `eslint` declared as a peer dependency with a range that prerelease versions like `10.0.0-alpha.0` don't satisfy. Additionally, add `--legacy-peer-deps` CLI flag to `npm install` commands for which the `.npmrc` file doesn't apply, like `npm install ../eslint` in `types-integration.yml`. The PR can be merged as soon as it is approved.
- In the `eslint/eslint` repository, submit a PR to update ranges for `@eslint/js` and `eslint` in `packages/eslint-config-eslint/package.json` to include v10 and its prereleases. This is to ensure that the corresponding version of `@eslint/js` is used when linting. The PR can be merged as soon as it is approved.
- In the `eslint/eslint` repository, create an issue to track all temporary changes that should eventually be reverted or modified (e.g., to remove `legacy-peer-deps` settings when possible).

In this phase, we should also prepare infrastructure for v9.x maintenance:

- In the `eslint/eslint` repository, create `v9.x-dev` branch that points to the latest release commit (e.g., to the `9.39.0` commit). On the Branches page, check if the branch is protected (it should already be, as its name matches a predefined pattern in branch protection rules).
- In the `eslint/eslint` repository, submit a PR that adds `v9.x-dev` to the lists of branches that trigger CI checks in `.github/workflows/*` files. The PR should target the `v9.x-dev` branch and can be merged as soon as it is approved.
- On Netlify, open the `docs-eslint` project, and under `Project Configuration > Build & Deploy > Continuous deployment` find `Branches and deploy contexts`. Add `v9.x-dev` to `Branch deploys`. This is to enable deploy previews on PRs that target the `v9.x-dev` branch. While there, check if the `next` branch is also included in `Branch deploys` (it should already be).
- On Jenkins, in configurations for the `eslint Release` and `eslint-js Release` jobs, add `v9.x-dev` to the list of choices for the `RELEASE_BRANCH` parameter.

### Subsequent Prereleases

- When it is expected that the next planned prerelease will advance from `alpha` to `beta`, or from `beta` to `rc`, in the `eslint/eslint.org` repository submit a PR to update `upcomingVersionPrereleaseType` in `tools/release-data.js` accordingly. The PR can be merged as soon as it is approved.

### Final Release

- When it is expected that the next planned release will be the final v10.0.0 release, in the `eslint/eslint.org` repository submit a PR to update `upcomingVersionPrereleaseType` in `tools/release-data.js` to `null`. The PR can be merged as soon as it is approved.
- In the `eslint/eslint` repository, submit two PRs that add `"/docs/v9.x"` to the `skipPatterns` list in `docs/tools/validate-links.js`. One PR should target the `main` branch and the other the `v9.x-dev` branch. The PRs should be reviewed and approved in time, but merged right before ESLint 10.0.0 is released.

WIP

## Troubleshooting

### `npm publish` returns a 404

This typically happens due to a permission error related to the npm token.

- `release-please` uses a granular access token that expires after a year. This token is tied to the `eslintbot` npm account and needs to be regenerated every year in March. If the access token is expired, `npm publish` returns a 404.
- Jenkins uses a classic access token without an expiration date, but it does require a 2FA code to publish. If the 2FA code is incorrect, then `npm publish` returns a 404.
